In this seesaw of techniques, the side which
counted quickly before the opponent had time to
perfect the new tactics and weapons had a decided
advantage. Operations research, bringing
scientists in to analyze the technical import of
the fluctuations between measure and
countermeasure, made it possible to speed up our
reaction rate in several critical cases. This is
on page 136 and continuing. Likewise, in their
struggle to counter our improved convoy escort
tactics, the U-boats introduced the acoustic
torpedo, which steers for a ship by listening to
the sound it makes underwater. Our development of
countermeasures was based on studies of the
operations research group into the pattern of
sound produced by the sea, in the sea by ship's
propellers, and on the probable reaction of the
torpedo to various decoy devices. In this end, and
in other cases, information derived from
intelligence. and interpreted by the members of
the group in the light of their own scientific
knowledge and was utilized to devise improved
countermeasures. Submarine and anti-submarine
operations are closely complementary. Methods
developed for attack have to have as a counterpart
methods for defense based on the principles
underlying both. In the subgroup devoted to
submarine warfare, theoretical and operational
studies were carried out on the coordination of
attack by groups of submarines, torpedo fire
control, the effectiveness of rescue of downed
aviators, causes of loss of the United States
submarines, the relative merits of various types
of torpedoes under different circumstances, and
enemy countermeasures to our radar search
equipment.
On page 137. The assistance and cooperation of
industry and science have been indispensable.
Without this assistance, many of the weapons
which have come into being as a result of intensive
wartime research and development otherwise
never would have been completed and introduced
into the fleet. It had often been predicted that in
a national emergency, the totalitarian
countries would have a great technical advantage
over the democracies because of their ability to
regiment scientific facilities and manpower at
will. The results achieved by Germany, Italy, and
Japan do not bear out this contention. Studies
made since the close of the war indicate that in
none of these countries was the scientific effort
as effectively handled as in the United States.
The rapid, effective, and original results
obtained in bringing science into our effort are
proof of the responsiveness of our former
government to meeting emergencies, the
technical competence of American scientists,
and the productive genius of American industry.
Page 138. Sufficient progress in the technical
development and use of improved weapons and
associated equipment has been made during the war
to emphasize the necessity for continued
progress. Working under the stress of an
emergency, the fact of primary importance was
immediate effectiveness against the enemy. This
resulted in crash designs and production that
required considerable more personnel, weight,
and space than the more seasoned designs that
might have been produced had the time been
available. Thus, the rapid expansion and
development of new weapons and devices during the
war was often at the cost of factors of major
importance, such as the reserved buoyancy and
stability of the ships in which they were
installed. Those wartime designs, while they
have well served their purpose against the enemy,
have nevertheless created problems of
refinement and improvement in the ultimate
design of equipment, which must be so resolved
that a minimum of personnel or weight in a space
will be required to attain the desired effect.
These problems must be energetically attacked in
the coming years of peace. Only by continuing
vigorous research and development can this
country hope to be protected from any potential
enemies and maintain the position which it now
enjoys in possessing the greatest effective
naval fighting force in history.
Page 140. the definition of the Bureau of Ships
Research and Development.
Quote, All research and development undertaken
by the Bureau of Ships is directed toward the
development of new or improved materials,
components, equipments, machinery, systems,
and structural factors entering into the
construction, maintenance, and operation of
naval vessels to enable these vessels to better
fulfill their mission. Skipping now to page 240 in
the organizational chart of the Bureau of Ships
Radio Division, September 1944, we find the head
of the radio division, code 900, Captain J.B. Dow,
U.S.N. Coming on down, design branch, code 910, We
see Commander Hull and Commander Shepard. And
then code 914, assistant for radio and sonar,
Commander Ross and Bennett. And down under him,
code 940, the sonar section, Commander J.C.
Myers.
Those are well-known names in our work.
After discussing the early development of radar,
on page 238, we quote, in the reorganization of the
two bureaus of shipbuilding into the Bureau of
Ships in June 1940, the radio division lost its
status and became the radio and sound branch of the
design division.
There was no radar at this particular time
Relatively few ships and planes carried
elaborate radio gear. Relatively few ships were
being built before the war. Then, with
reorganization and declaration of a limited
emergency, emphasis was placed upon fostering
and coordinating the design and development of
radio and sound equipment, establishing
military characteristics and setting up
specifications for their production,
determining ship's allowance, allowances,
estimating requirements on the basis of those
allowances, and asking the Bureau of Supplies and
Accounts to procure the equipment on a
competitive bid basis and planning installation
maintenance. Phase 239, continuing. The extent
to which the electronic program expanded is
astonishing. In 1940, the Bureau of Ships spent
about $6 million for equipping and maintaining
ships and shore stations with electronics
equipment and for electronics development work.
Five years later, The annual figure totaled more
than 1,000 millions. During this time, civilian
and officer personnel had expanded from 39 in
January 1940 to a total of 1,205 in September 1945.
The
growth of the electronics program during 1940 and
1941, however, placed the organization under
great strain. The development of radar seemed to
require the setting up of a separate unit. The
fleet did not know how to use it, the yard did not
know how to install it, and so forth. Page 240. The
research and design section initiated research,
coordinated it, and prepared specifications for
all the radio types except radar. Installation
and maintenance of radio equipment and
initiation of their procurement, on the other
hand, were handled separately for each equipment
used, ship, shore, Marine Corps, and the like. The
procurement of equipment was not consolidated.
In view of the increasing radio and sound
expansions and the even more rapid development of
the electronics art, the first and perhaps the
only fundamental reorganization, that of
October 1942, made the radio branch into a
separate bureauship's division. This has been
indicated already as Code 900 under Captain
Dowell.
In mid-1944, the new organization included three
branches, design, equipment, and installation
and maintenance. The design branch,
parenthetical, with which we are concerned,
prepared design and performance
characteristics from military characteristics
laid down by ARP 25 of CNO, established
manufacturing specifications, and initiated
and coordinated design and development
including airborne design, which has been
transferred to the aircraft branch in November
43. An interesting statement on page 248. The
Bureau of Aeronautics Procurements constituted
a very large volume, even larger than that of the
Bureau of Ships, and was scattered among many of
the same companies finishing Bureau of Ships
requirements.
to allow the Bureau of Aeronautics to procure
independently would have split the Navy
contracting into competing and
administratively independent camps. Thus, the
entire activity was relegated to the Bureau of
Ships. And immediately prior to the war's end in
1945, the division adopted the name, quote,
electronics, unquote.
Page 251. Electronics design, quoted in full
because of its importance. A, design policy
between World Wars I and II. One great lesson
learned by the Navy between the World Wars was not
to depend on the surpluses of one war to carry it
through the lean appropriation period after that
war. As a consequence of this philosophy, most
appropriations flow into material items to the
detriment of research and design. Following
World War I, available funds barely permitted
equipments needed to be met, so that limited use
was made of the large commercial laboratories for
developing new instruments. In retrospect, it is
easy to see that the Navy would have fared far
better with fewer but more advanced equipment
serving as a basis for large-scale manufacturer
manufacture when war proved imminent. As a
consequence of this almost insurmountable
error, it became necessary in World War II to
concentrate design, to concentrate advancement
in design, while simultaneously attempting mass
production
It is not the purpose of this history to malign or to
slander our predecessors. Instead, we approach
this particular phase of the Bureau's history
from the standpoint expressed by one of our
leading naval officers, quote, the judgment of a
schoolboy in retrospect is better than the
greatest general on the field of battle, end
quote. In retrospect, then, let us view the facts
concerning our lack of attention upon research,
facts which now appall us, but which may permit us
to gain some valuable experience. The port
probably lay in fixing too much attention upon
meeting material needs of the moment rather than
accepting something less in order to devote more
time and money to advancing research and
development. Whatever the reasons for this near
catastrophe, we must be alert to this danger,
which will always be with us, for it is only human to
prefer tangible goods to gambling on
developments which may turn out to be
unsuccessful. That the Bureau should have asked
for more money for the specific purpose of
electronic design and development is painfully
evident now. As late as 1939, for example, the
Bureau requested to receive for research and
development the incredible small sum of $25,000.
All war plans for electronics made during the
years of peace were not only qualitatively but
quantitatively inadequate. This fault was a
common one and indicated that the general refusal
of the public to think about war in realistic terms
and with imagination was reflected in the
planning of the department. The Naval Research
Laboratory found that the suggestion of the
Edison Board of World War I proved to be an
immensely profitable venture, particularly in
its development of underwater sound and radar.
However, it never received the Navy's
wholehearted support. the attitude of which
rapidly approached that of a businessman
interested chiefly in large-scale production
and distrusting, untried theories and
long-haired professors. Indeed, all research
was stopped, and the neighbors of such laboratory
almost wiped out in an economy wave in the early
1930s. Unhappily, the same suspension of
research also occurred in industry, where
emphasis was placed on production that had
already been engineered. The laboratory
department of Westinghouse, for example, faded
into oblivion. What basis do we have now for not
believing, if peace continues for a dozen years or
so, that interest in new development will not
again subside?
Page 253, paragraph B, design policy and workload
during wartime. Despite our failure to maintain
research and design in peacetime, the war years
proved that one vital qualification of this
criticism must be observed. To say that our
complex problems of equipping the wartime fleet
with modern electronic equipment stemmed wholly
from an inadequate development program is
somewhat of an oversimplification of the
situation. This conclusion is based on the
assumption that with adequately developed
equipments as of the beginning of the war, designs
could have been frozen and full emphasis devoted
to standardization and maximum production.
Actually, such an action could never have been
fully adopted since it was a basic policy of the
United States throughout the war and in all fields
to deliberately sacrifice some measure of
efficiency in production in the interest of
constantly improving its weapons. It is
interesting to note that such a philosophy was in
direct opposition to that adopted by Germany
where early standardization was established in
an effort to squeeze out the last measure of
production. Thus, even though research and
development had been carried on during peace,
efforts to improve equipment by applying the
lessons learned in actual combat would have
continued. In so doing, therefore, production
problems would have remained relatively as
complex and pressing, but our designs would have
been more advanced. More advanced. Concerning
the interrelationship between design and
production, one job patient in the design branch
before the war and in its early stages was the need
to indoctrinate a large number of officer and
civil service engineering personnel in methods
of arriving at suitable designs and transmitting
data to hundreds of contractors. Contractors had
to be trained also, for most of them were
inexperienced in meeting Navy specifications.
They go on to discuss standardization, and the
Bureau of Ships performed a particularly
effective job in the case of tubes, cables, and
connectors, although standardization in this
field was carried out primarily at the Army Signal
Standards Agency with Bureau of Ships
assistance. On page 255, continuing,
the magnitude of this design task facing the
technical minds of the armed forces and private
industry of our nation can scarcely be grasped by
even the most interested reader. Chart 22 plots
the new design developments as a function of
calendar years from 1938 to the war's end. Roughly
reading it in 1938, the number
of model letters assigned were about 100. In 1940,
it dropped to about 80. In 1941, it was back up to
100. In 1942, it was about 300. In 1943, it was About
520 in 1944,
about 540 in 1946, and it dropped down again to less
than 200.
From 47 new designs in 1938, this load skyrocketed
to 520 in 1944. Figures alone, however, present
but a superficial picture of the overall
proportions of this comprehensive program.
Undisclosed is the fact that in this period entire
new systems were designed based on principles
which had scarcely been considered before the
war. The most widely known and appealing to the
public and technicians alike is radar. However,
many others involving equal or almost equal
technical problems were conceived, developed,
tested, produced, and installed in time to play an
effective part in the successful outcome of the
war. Typical of these are Loran, IFF, television,
beacons, ground control approach systems,
automatic bearing indicator direction finders,
radio and radar countermeasures, bathy
thermographs and their tactical usage, repeat,
bathy thermographs and their tactical usage,
meteorological apparatus, cryptographic and
cryptoanalytical devices, radio
teletypewriter systems, and communications
equipment in the ultra-high frequency regions.
Concomitantly, each of these new projects
required a host of attendant advances in the
related fields of vacuum tubes, components,
controls, antennas, and so forth.
Page 257.
Improvement in existing equipments were
constantly being made. Fast time constant
circuits were added to radars to enable them to
track planes through land masses. Indication of
bearing error in sonar equipment BDI was
developed and incorporated in old and new models.
Constant major and minor changes followed these
typical examples, all designed to make the
equipment more effective, more rugged, more
closely representative of actual combat
requirements.
Now, item C, paragraph C, page 258, specific
research programs. One, underwater sound. The
underwater sound program throughout the
interwar period proved to be the most important
and involved of the Navy's research programs.
Research and development in this field prior to
the end of World War I centered in New London,
Connecticut, but in 1919, this activity
transferred to the U.S. Naval Experimental
Station at Annapolis, Maryland. Very soon
thereafter, the multi-shot microphone lines
were developed for use with electrical
direction-finding compensator. and these
together became the generally accepted devices
for detecting submerged submarines. In
addition, the Sonic Depth Finder for
navigational aid was developed at Annapolis. But
after 1923, all this research work continued at
the Naval Research Laboratory and the Navy Yard in
Washington, as well as at the various commercial
laboratories. Prior to this development,
underwater sound detectors, hurriedly designed
and manufactured mainly from design knowledge of
telephone circuits and equipments, had proved
the solution to the U-boat in many ways.
However, when the enemy denoised their
submarines to minimize the effects of such
noisemakers as pumps, fans, motors, gears,
bearing propellers, and so forth, this form of
detection equipment became almost completely
inefficient. Out of the necessity for a more
adequate device, the echo ranging means were
devised. Echo ranging devices provide merely
means whereby the researching vessel transmits
or sends out an underwater sound signal in all
directions. The presence of a target within a
reasonable distance produces a returning echo
for this transmitted signal. By means of accurate
timing and bearing determination mechanisms,
this equipment is enabled not only to detect the
presence of the target, but also to locate its
position and distance and bearing. From the words
sound, navigation, and ranging comes the word
sonar for this type of equipment.
Out of these detecting and direction and
depth-finding equipments developed the
standard high-frequency echo-ranging and
sounding equipments, later known as models XL,
XN, and QA, employing the quartz-steel type of
projector. These early equipments were, until a
commercial company could be interested in
producing them, manufactured by the Navy Yard,
which first produced and installed them in 1930 on
about 20 destroyers of the latest class at that
time, the 1200-ton class. Rochelle salt
projectors were next developed for submarine use
at slow speeds, while for higher speeds a resonant
type device which could eliminate interference
from background noises was introduced. With the
acquisition of the British Streamline dome,
however, the Rochelle salt type attained general
service due to its narrow beam width and
consequent better direction. Under the
Roosevelt administration, the shipbuilding
program expanded during the 1930s, and with its
sonar development and installations increased.
In 1939, only one major production source for this
equipment existed, although it was now working
overtime to keep up with demand. The Navy now had
reliable echo-ranging and echo-sounding
equipment for large ships, but its experimental
models for small craft proved wholly inadequate.
In 1941, therefore, Radio Corporation of America
and Submarine Signal Company were given a
development contract which succeeded after some
difficulties and false starts in turning out a
successful Rochelle assault set for small craft.
While sound improvements were developed by the
National Defense and Research Council,
including ideas for better bearing
determination for reducing the blast on an
operator's ears, Most improvements were
borrowed from the British. Research throughout
the entire war continued, however, to such an
extent that up to VJ Day, modifications were still
being made to meet the changes in the war against
U-boats. Submarine warfare is no exception to the
historically proven rule that measure and
countermeasure succeed each other in swift
succession, with each new weapon more terrible
than the last and each defense more difficult to
provide in time. The U-boat developments
included deeper submerged depths, tougher
hulls, and faster submerged speeds. These made it
necessary to develop means of maintaining
contact with a deep target and determining target
depth in order to improve attack accuracy.
Operational experience with high-speed task
groups also made it necessary both to give
attention to underwater streamlining in order to
reduce water noise and to improve ship search
efficiency at higher speeds. VE Day found the
Germans launching a submarine capable of
completely submerged operation for periods of
weeks or months, equipped with incredibly deep
diving and with getaway speeds of 24 knots
submerged. Our loud opinion is that it could have
outdistanced and probably shaken off any of our
escorts which might have attacked it. Thus we see
the importance of sonar and the vital necessity
for its adequate development. The extent of
Allied scientific advancement in this field may
be found in the access loss of 996 submarines in the
72-month Battle of the Atlantic.
On page 275, under post-war design, under the
sonar, quote, effort is in the direction of
increased range and accuracy, more positive
target identification, and integrations of the
various sonar systems for pro- and
anti-submarine attacks. This work includes
airborne sonar and research into underwater
propagation.
Continuing from the report of April 1947 of
Captain Hull, who voted to the Chief of the Bureau,
he made these comments. Captain Hull continued,
In order to meet the electronics objective,
certain fundamental works including
propagation of electromagnetic waves,
development of frequency generating and
stabilizing devices, new electron tubes and
components, various types of amplifying and
detecting devices and associated systems
requirements are being studied and evaluated.
The electronics division has attempted to make
full use of the developments consummated during
the last war. As a result, the work of the Division
has increased so that at present 60% more projects
are being handled than at any time during the war.
In this connection, the Electronics Division is
engaged in a thorough standardization program
with the Army on component design, stocking,
cataloging, and nomenclature. The research and
development work of the Division is handled by
assigning projects to various agencies and
contractors. Projects are set up directly with
commercial organizations and laboratories.
with activities such as the Bureau of Standards,
Naval Electronics Laboratory, U.S. Naval
Underwater Sound Laboratory, and through the
Office of Naval Research for the Naval Research
Laboratory at various universities. The needs of
the service are under continual review, and new
technological developments are under constant
surveillance with the objective of having the
best electronic equipment and techniques at all
times, end quote, on page 277. One of the most
difficult things for the Navy Department to do was
to actually get the stuff that was being designed
into the fleet.
The history goes on, on page 278, to give a
description of this difficulty which plagued us
all at the time.
Part four, the procurement program,
requirements and allowances. Despite the rapid
advances in design, a system for determining and
reporting electronic requirements had not been
developed until late 1942. The pressure of the
task, however, caused the requirement and
allowance program to be projected, a system which
required starting with plans and procedures,
data on size, Voltage, power supply, mast
heights, strengthen the freedom from
obstructions and other ship's data. No ship had
radar equipment, for instance, or any allowance
for such equipment, and until radar demonstrated
its worth in combat, it proved difficult to
interest people in it. Yet the responsibility
dissolved upon the electronics division, the
electronics division to act as technical
consultant, technical consultant to the CNO, so
that the latter could fulfill its responsibility
for issuing procurement directives. The General
Board and CNO established military
characteristics of equipment and requirements
for the ship class. The Bureau of Ships and
Electronics Division determined which
equipment met those characteristics, estimated
how many would be needed, and then initiated and
planned their procurement. If existing designs
proved not suitable, the Bureau initiated design
action to meet the specifications set forth.
Let's do that again. If existing designs prove not
suitable, the Bureau initiate action, initiate
design action to meet the specifications set
forth. Beginning in March 1942, the radar
installation section made a thorough study of
physical and electrical characteristics of
ships and recommended to CNO a certain class of
radar for each ship type. For example, medium air
search radar was recommended for destroyers as
well as fire control equipment for the main
battery of each destroyer. The number of such
equipment was determined for each ship type.
Complete allowance and requirements were
checked at the installation planners for
technical accuracy and by the ship building
division for ship stability. Allowances having
been determined for all ships of the fleet by the
summer of 1942, the Electronics Division could
then estimate requirements for each ship afloat
and under construction. Upon completion of the
estimate of allowances and requisitions,
procurements were placed for all requirements
not already placed since the allowances were
completed class by class. To effect these
procurements, a rule was set up, not based on any
experience that had not existed, that an initial
and single-shot reserve by providing 15% for
battle damage and 20% for contingencies of
various kinds, including provision for school
equipment or requests from allied nations such as
Great Britain, Australia, Russia, France, for
equipment under Lend-Lease. Long before the
equipment could be delivered to the ships,
Lend-Lease requests alone amounted to more than
five times the original contingency factor. In an
effort to correct this, the radio division in the
winter of 1942 and 43 requested the land lease
administrator for exact estimates of
requirements, but this request was never
entirely complied with. Moreover, the land lease
administration continued to request new models
just emerging into production instead of the
original models for which quantitative
production had been achieved.
In the spring and fall of 1943, the determination
of requirements was placed on an IBM basis. A
centralized system was set up providing a single
requirements card for each equipment. All ship
requirements became anchored to the
shipbuilding program, and when the date of new
construction of a ship changed, the requirements
altered automatically. Moreover, the use of IBM
systems yielded a ready indication of district
requirements permitting ships to the naval
districts without need for looking up individual
ship completion dates or location of building
yards. It became obvious by the spring of 1944 that
the coordination of requirements made it
necessary to eliminate the duplication among
claimant sections for control of equipment
types. For example, separate radar requirements
for establishment and procurement were made by
each of the Marine Corps ship shore sections and
installation and maintenance branch. This
conclusion led to the organization of the
equipment branch in July and September of 1944
from parts of the installation and maintenance
branch and procurement and production branch. As
already described in the organization section,
the equipment branch was responsible for
determining what and how much should be procured
from whom. Under the terms of this
reorganization, all persons concerned with
determining requirements and distributing a
certain class of equipment were placed in one
section. Change tape to side three. Change tape to
side three.
And then continue on this equipment section.
change tape to side three and continue on this
equipment section.